---
description: Learn how to start using the Celo ContractKit & DAppKit with DataHub
---

# 1. Connect to a Celo node with DataHub

## Introduction

Celo is an open platform that makes financial tools accessible to anyone with a mobile phone. There are 2 tools that are especially useful when it comes to developing DApps on the Celo network:

* **ContractKit**
* **DAppKit**

#### ContractKit

This is a NodeJS package that makes it easy to interact with the Celo network and the core Celo Smart Contracts as well as custom ones built by the community.

#### DAppKit

This is yet another NodeJS package that comes with a set of useful methods for interacting with the Celo Wallet. This package is meant to work with React Native using the Expo framework. It will allow you to easily sign transactions, send funds, and access user accounts without writing too much code. You can focus on your core features and let the DAppKit enhance the experience of your DApp users.

For simplicity, we will be creating a NodeJS application and not a React Native mobile app.

### Prerequisites

* Download the latest version of NodeJS \(+10.x\)
* Use any code editor like VSCode etc.
* Required packages:
  * **@celo/contractkit** - for the Celo Javascript API
  * **dotenv** - for working with environment variables

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/bz76yk-Bww4" caption="Celo Learn Pathway Tutorial \#1: Learn how connect to Celo node with DataHub" %}

## Creating NodeJS application

The first step is to set up our project and all required dependencies.

**Please make sure that you have Node.js +10 installed on your machine.**

First, make sure you have the right version of Node.js installed on your development machine. We encourage developers to use a version manager to easily switch between different Node.js engine versions without having to worry about breaking any existing projects and development setups. Popular options include [NVM](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) and [Asdf-Nodejs](https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf-nodejs) . Check your current version with:

```bash
node -v
```

When a correct Node.js version is being set you should see a similar output:

```bash
v12.19.1
```

The next step is to create a directory for your project where you will initialize the new Node.js project. You can do this using the following command:

```bash
npm init -y
```

As a result, you will see a new file package.json created in the current directory. We’re going to just leave the file as-is for now:

```javascript
{
  “name”: “celo”,
  “version”: “1.0.0”,
  “description”: “”,
  “main”: “index.js”,
  “scripts”: {
    “test”: “echo \”Error: no test specified\” && exit 1”
  },
  “author”: “”,
  “license”: “ISC”,
  “dependencies”: {
   }
}
```

## Installing packages

Now we are ready to install the required packages to our app:

* **@celo/contractkit** - for the Celo Javascript API
* **dotenv** - for working with environment variables

Install the packages:

```bash
npm install --save @celo/contractkit dotenv web3
```

After the successful installation, you will also see the packages added to your `package.json` file:

```javascript
...
"dependencies": {
  "@celo/contractkit": "^1.0.1",
  "dotenv": "^8.2.0",
  "web3": "^1.3.3"
}
...
```

{% hint style="warning" %}
If you're getting an error in`npm install --save @celo/contractkit dotenv web3`then check our forum for a possible solution. [Check Here](https://community.figment.io/t/celo-tutorial-errors-issues/65)
{% endhint %}

## Configuring environment

When we have that out of our way, we can continue by creating an `.env` file that will hold all our sensitive data. You should never commit this file to a git repository so make sure to create a `.gitignore` file with the following content:

```bash
.env
```

Now, open `.env` file and add two environmental variables that we will need for all our tutorials:

```bash
REST_URL=https://celo-alfajores--rpc.datahub.figment.io/apikey/<YOUR API KEY>/
```

Make sure you have replaced `YOUR API KEY` with the valid DataHub access key. To obtain an API key you need to go to the [DataHub dashboard](https://datahub.figment.io/login) \(assuming you have created an account\), then click on “Celo” in the list of available services, followed by Alfajores RPC Documentation, and copy the API Key from the configuration page.

**Keep the .env file safe as it contains your DataHub API access key.**

**Make sure that you don’t delete the trailing slash in REST\_URL environmental variable**

## Connecting to the Celo network

We are now all set up with our application and we can start writing some Javascript code. The first step here is to connect to the Celo node using ContractKit.

Create a connect.js file with the following content:

```javascript
const ContractKit = require('@celo/contractkit');
const Web3 = require('web3');

require('dotenv').config();

const main = async () => {
  // Create connection to DataHub Celo Network node
  const web3 = new Web3(process.env.REST_URL);
  const client = ContractKit.newKitFromWeb3(web3);

  // Query chain ID
  const chainId = await web3.eth.getChainId()
    .catch((err) => { throw new Error(`Could not get chain id: ${err}`); });

  // Query chain height
  const height = await web3.eth.getBlockNumber()
    .catch((err) => { throw new Error(`Could not get block height: ${err}`); });

  console.log('ChainId:', chainId);
  console.log('Block height:', height);

  console.log('Successfully connected to Celo Network');
};

main().catch((err) => {
  console.error(err);
});
```

Let’s break down the code above a little bit. First, we have to import `@celo/contractkit` and `web3`. These libraries will allow us to connect to the Celo Node. Connection to the node is created here:

```text
const web3 = new Web3(process.env.REST_URL);
const client = ContractKit.newKitFromWeb3(web3);
```

Where is this `process.env.REST_URL` coming from? It is an environmental variable that is loaded from our `.env` file using this line of code:

```javascript
...
require('dotenv').config();
...
```

**As you remember, we do not want to hardcode sensitive data inside of our app, but rather use .env file, which is not committed to the git repository.**

The next step is to use that connection to query the node for chain id and block data in the most recent height. Here you can see that we are using the `client.web3.eth` object for calling `getChainId` and `getBlockNumber`. Why `eth`? Isn’t it something that should be used with Ethereum? You're right! But Celo is a close cousin of Ethereum which means that most of the methods that work with Ethereum will also work with Celo.

Ok, it’s time to run the code:

```bash
node connect.js
```

If everything is configured correctly you should see a similar output:

```text
ChainId: 44787
Block height: 3261577
Successfully connected to Celo Network
```

Congratulations, you have successfully created a NodeJS application that can connect to the Celo node!

## Conclusion

In this tutorial you’ve learned how to use the ContractKit package and DataHub to connect to the Celo node. You also had a chance to run 2 simple queries to test that connection.

The complete code for this tutorial can be found on [**Github**](https://github.com/figment-networks/tutorials/tree/main/celo/1_connecting_to_node).

### Next steps

In our next tutorial, we will create our first Celo account on the Celo Alfajores testnet and funding it with some testnet tokens.

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Celo and DataHub tech with us you can [join our community](https://discord.gg/Chhuv5zHy3) today!

### Next steps

In our next tutorial, we will create our first Celo account on the Celo Alfajores testnet and funding it with some testnet tokens.

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Celo and DataHub tech with us you can [join our community](https://discord.gg/Chhuv5zHy3) today!

