---
description: >-
  Learn how to start using the Secret Network JavaScript API (SecretJS) with
  DataHub
---

# 1. Connect to a Secret node with DataHub

## Introduction

Secret Contracts are the first implementation of general purpose privacy preserving computations on the public blockchain.

A Secret App is a decentralized application leveraging Secret Contracts, and SecretJS is the Swiss army knife to power JavaScript based Secret Apps.

In this guide, we are going to write a Node.js script to introduce some of the basic concepts that are important to understand how SecretJS works. This will get us started with connecting to the Secret Network and learning how to develop more advanced applications.

#### Requirements in this pathway –

* The latest version of NodeJS
* Any Code editor like VSCode etc.
* Required packages –
  * secretjs - for the Secret Network JavaScript API
  * dotenv - for working with environment variables
* Docker – Check out our Docker guide [**Here**](https://learn.figment.io/network-documentation/extra-guides/docker-setup-for-windows)\*\*\*\*
* Rust \(In tutorial 5 we’ll tell you how to do that\)

_**Note -**_ For this tutorial, we recommend you to use **Linux/macOS**. This tutorial and practices intended to be performed on Linux/macOS. If you have only Windows in your system then you have to perform tutorial exercises through WSL or by using Ubuntu in Docker. To know more about how to use Ubuntu and run Linux commands on Windows, please check [**This**](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/windows-ubuntu-hyperv-containers#1-overview)\*\*\*\*

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/tqZBDdDuhFA" caption="SECRET Learn Pathway Tutorial \#1 - Connect to a Secret node with DataHub" %}

## Creating the SecretJS application

Before we can jump in and start using SecretJS, we need to set up our project and all required dependencies.

{% hint style="info" %}
Please make sure that you have Node.js +12 installed on your machine.
{% endhint %}

First, make sure you have the right version of Node.js installed on your development machine. All tutorials in the Secret Network Learn Pathway require at least version 12.x, however, there might be compatibility issues if you're using the most recent release like 15.x.

We encourage developers to use a version manager to easily switch between different Node.js engine versions without having to worry about breaking any existing projects and development setups. Popular options include [NVM](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) and [Asdf-Nodejs](https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf-nodejs). Check your current version with:

```text
node -v
```

When a correct Node.js version is being set you should see a similar output:

```text
v12.19.1
```

The next step is to create a directory for your project where you will initialize the new Node.js project. You can do this using the following command:

```javascript
npm init -y
```

As a result you will see a new file `package.json` created in the current directory. We're going to just leave the file as is for now:

```javascript
{
  "name": "secret",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC",
  "dependencies": {
   }
}
```

## Installing packages

Now that we have our Node.js application set up we can install the required packages:

* `secretjs` - for the Secret Network JavaScript API
* `dotenv` - for working with environment variables
* `@iov/crypto` - for low-level cryptographic functionality

Install the packages:

```javascript
npm install --save secretjs dotenv @iov/crypto
```

After the successful installation you will also see the packages added to your `package.json` file:

```text
"dependencies": {
  "@iov/crypto": "^2.5.0",
  "secretjs": "^0.10.4",
  "dotenv": "^8.2.0"
}
```

## Configure environment

When we have that out of our way, we can continue by creating an `.env` file which will hold all our sensitive data.

You should never commit this file to a git repository so make sure to create a `.gitignore` file with the following content:

```javascript
.env
```

Now, open `.env` file and add a few environment variables that we're going to use in all tutorials moving forward:

* `SECRET_REST_URL` - REST URL for Secret Network DataHub node.
* `SECRET_CHAIN_ID` - ChainId of the Secret Network, should be `secret-2` by default for mainnet.

Your `.env` file should look similar to the [example](https://github.com/figment-networks/tutorials/blob/main/secret/.env.example):

```javascript
SECRET_REST_URL='https://secret-holodeck-2--lcd--full.datahub.figment.io/apikey/<YOUR API KEY>/'
SECRET_CHAIN_ID=holodeck-2
```

Make sure you have replaced `YOUR API KEY` with the valid DataHub access key. To obtain an API key you need to go to the [DataHub dashboard](https://datahub.figment.io/login) \(assuming you have created an account\), then click on "Secret Network" in the list of available services, followed by `Secret LCD/Rest Documentation`, and copy the API hostname and key from the configuration page.

{% hint style="info" %}
Keep the `.env` file safe as it contains your DataHub API access key.
{% endhint %}

## Interacting with Secret Network

Now that we have completed all the necessary configuration steps, we can finally start building our application. We will start by configuring the SecretJS package and then check if everything works by fetching the node status.

Create the `connect.js` file with the following content:

```javascript
// Load SecretJS components
const { CosmWasmClient } = require('secretjs');

// Load environment variables
require('dotenv').config();

const main = async () => {
  // Create connection to DataHub Secret Network node
  const client = new CosmWasmClient(process.env.SECRET_REST_URL);

  // Query chain ID
  const chainId = await client.getChainId()
    .catch((err) => { throw new Error(`Could not get chain id: ${err}`); });

  // Query chain height
  const height = await client.getHeight()
    .catch((err) => { throw new Error(`Could not get block height: ${err}`); });

  console.log('ChainId:', chainId);
  console.log('Block height:', height);

  console.log('Successfully connected to Secret Network');
};

main().catch((err) => {
  console.error(err);
});
```

There are a few things happening in the code, let's break it down a bit.

First, we load the Secret Network node client configuration from environment variables \(`.env` file\) created in the previous step. Environment variables are convenient to use instead of hardcoding values in the code and only need to change in one place.

Using SecretJS is super simple, all we have to do is require the package and we should be good to go with CosmWasmClient, a generic client to interact with a CosmWasm blockchain.

```javascript
const { CosmWasmClient } = require('secretjs');
```

Finally, in the `main` function we initialise the client and get some network info:

```javascript
  // Query chain ID
  const chainId = await client.getChainId()
    .catch((err) => { throw new Error(`Could not get chain id: ${err}`); });

  // Query chain height
  const height = await client.getHeight()
    .catch((err) => { throw new Error(`Could not get block height: ${err}`); });

  console.log('ChainId:', chainId);
  console.log('Block height:', height);
```

Let's run the code:

```javascript
node connect.js
```

If everything is configured correctly you should see a similar output:

```javascript
ChainId: holodeck-2

Block height: 398604
```

Congratulations, you have successfully connected to the node!

## Conclusion

Now that we have successfully connected to a Secret Network node using DataHub, we are ready to move on to the next tutorial.

The complete code for this tutorial can be found on [**Github**](https://github.com/figment-networks/tutorials/blob/main/secret/1_connecting_to_node/connect.js).

### Next Steps

In the next tutorial, we will be creating our first Secret account on the Secret Network testnet and funding it with test tokens.

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Secret Network tech with us you can join [**our community**](https://discord.gg/fszyM7K) today!

