---
description: >-
  Learn how to start using the Avalanche blockchain with Javascript API and
  DataHub
---

# 1. Connect to an Avalanche node with DataHub

## Introduction

[Avalanche](https://avax.network/) is an open-source platform for launching [decentralized applications](https://support.avalabs.org/en/articles/4587146-what-is-a-decentralized-application-dapp) and enterprise [blockchain](http://support.avalabs.org/en/articles/4064677-what-is-a-blockchain) deployments in one interoperable, highly scalable ecosystem. Avalanche is the first smart contracts platform that processes 4,500+ transactions/second and instantly confirms transactions. Ethereum developers can quickly build on Avalanche as Solidity works out-of-the-box.

A key difference between Avalanche and other decentralized networks is the consensus protocol. Over time, people have come to a false understanding that blockchains have to be slow and not scalable. The Avalanche protocol employs a novel approach to consensus to achieve its strong safety guarantees, quick finality, and high-throughput, without compromising decentralization.

Check out [Official Developer](https://docs.avax.network/) documentation for more details on how Avalanche works.

### Avalanche.js

[Avalanche.js](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchejs) is a client Javascript package that makes it easy to interact with the Avalanche blockchain nodes, query data, submit transactions and offers plenty of other functionality. It's the official package developed by Avalanche, and is a preferred method of communicating with nodes on the private or public networks for development purposes.

## Prerequisites

Before we dig into the Pathway, let's check if you have the right environment:

* Download the latest version of NodeJS \(12.x+\)
* Use any code editor like VSCode etc.
* Required packages:
  * **avalanche** - for the Avalanche Javascript API
  * **dotenv** - for working with environment variables

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/Km1FzF8gzBU?list=PLkgTdjgP1aUAyXMP7UaWmrfHzpxEt08wo" caption="Avalanche Learn Pathway Tutorial \#1 - Connect to Avalanche node with DataHub" %}

## Creating NodeJS application

The first step is to set up our project and all required dependencies.

{% hint style="info" %}
Please make sure that you have Node.js 12+ installed on your machine.
{% endhint %}

First, make sure you have the right version of Node.js installed on your development machine. We encourage developers to use a version manager to easily switch between different Node.js engine versions without having to worry about breaking any existing projects and development setups. Popular options include [NVM](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) and [Asdf-Nodejs](https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf-nodejs) . Check your current version with:

```bash
node -v
```

When a correct Node.js version is being set you should see a similar output:

```text
v12.19.1
```

The next step is to create a directory for your project where you will initialize the new Node.js project. You can do this using the following command:

```bash
npm init -y
```

As a result, you will see a new file package.json created in the current directory. We’re going to just leave the file as-is for now:

```text
{
  "name": "avalanche-pathway",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "keywords": [],
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

## Installing packages

We're ready to download and install a few required packages for our application:

* **avalanche** - to interact with Avalanche APIs
* **dotenv** - to manage environment variables

Run the following command to install all dependencies:

```bash
npm install --save avalanche dotenv
```

After the successful installation, you will also see the packages added to your `package.json` file:

```text
...
"dependencies": {
  "avalanche": "3.7.0",
  "dotenv": "^8.2.0"
}
```

{% hint style="info" %}
You need to install the `3.7.0` version of the Avalanche package \(there's is an issue in subsequent versions\)
{% endhint %}

## Configuring environment

When we have that out of our way, we can continue by creating an `.env` file that will hold all our sensitive data. You should never commit this file to a git repository, so make sure to create a `.gitignore` file with the following content:

```text
.env
credentials
```

Now, open `.env` file and add a few environment variables that we will need for all of the Pathway tutorials :

```text
NODE_URL=https://avalanche--fuji--rpc.datahub.figment.io
NODE_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
NETWORK_ID=5
NETWORK_NAME=fuji
```

The environment variables are:

* `NODE_URL` - URL for the Avalanche DataHub node
* `NODE_API_KEY` - DataHub API access key
* `NETWORK_ID` - Avalanche internal network ID for the Fuji Testnet
* `NETWORK_NAME` - Avalanche test network name

Make sure you have replaced `YOUR_API_KEY` with the valid DataHub access key. To obtain an API key you need to go to the [DataHub dashboard](https://datahub.figment.io/login) \(assuming you have created an account\), then click on [Avalanche](https://datahub.figment.io/services/avalanche) in the list of available services, and copy the API Key from the configuration page.

{% hint style="info" %}
Keep the .env file safe as it contains your DataHub API access key.
{% endhint %}

## Connecting to the Avalanche network

We have completed all the necessary configuration steps and can finally start building our application. We will start by configuring the Avalanche javascript package and then check if everything works by fetching the node status information.

Let's create a new file `client.js` in the root directory of your project, with the following content:

```javascript
// Load environment variables
require("dotenv").config()

// Load Avalanche SDK components
const { Avalanche } = require("avalanche")

if (!process.env.NODE_URL)     throw "NODE_URL env var is not set!"
if (!process.env.NODE_API_KEY) throw "NODE_API_KEY env var is not set!"
if (!process.env.NETWORK_ID)   throw "NETWORK_ID env var is not set!"
if (!process.env.NETWORK_NAME) throw "NETWORK_NAME env var is not set!"

// Configure Avalanche client from the DataHub url
const url = new URL(process.env.NODE_URL)
const client = new Avalanche(
  url.hostname,
  url.port,
  url.protocol.replace(":", ""),
  parseInt(process.env.NETWORK_ID),
  "X",
  "C",
  process.env.NETWORK_NAME
)

// Apply DataHub API authentication token
client.setAuthToken(process.env.NODE_API_KEY)

module.exports = client
```

We will be using this helper file throughout the Pathway, it provides us with a nice little function to create and configure the Avalanche node client so we don't have to unnecessarily copy and paste such code in multiple files. Another benefit is that we will also have an environment variables check to verify the environment and catch any issues before running the actual code.

Next, let's create an actual file and load our helper code. Create a `connect.js` file with the following:

```javascript
// Load Avalanche client helper
const client = require("./client")

async function main() {
  // Initialize the Info API client
  const info = client.Info()

  console.log("Fetching network information...")
  const nodeVersion = await info.getNodeVersion()
  const networkName = await info.getNetworkName()
  const networkID = await info.getNetworkID()
  const networkPeers = await info.peers()

  console.log("\nNetwork info:")
  console.log("* Node version:", nodeVersion)
  console.log("* Network name:", networkName)
  console.log("* Network ID:", networkID)
  console.log("* Connected Peers:", networkPeers.length)
}

main().catch((err) => {
  console.log("We have encountered an error!")
  console.error(err)
})
```

We first start by loading the environment variables with `dotenv` package, followed by the `require('./client')` - this is a common pattern for keeping maintainable code, and is heavily featured in all Pathway steps.

In the code above we query Avalanche node for some basic information, like node software version, network name, number of peers. Actual functionality is provided by the Info API client `client.Info()` that communicates with [Info API](https://docs.avax.network/build/avalanchego-apis/info-api). Avalanche provides a set of API endpoints for different components, like X/P/C chains, that are part of the same system.

Great, so we are ready to run our code:

```bash
node connect.js
```

If everything is configured properly, you should see output similar to this:

```bash
Fetching network information...

Network info:
* Node version: avalanche/1.2.0
* Network name: fuji
* Network ID: 5
* Connected Peers: 33
```

Congratulations, you have successfully connected to the node!

## Conclusion

Now that we have successfully connected to Avalanche node using DataHub, we are ready to move onto the next tutorial. We have also created the foundation for the next steps.

## Next Steps

In the next tutorial, we will be creating our first Avalanche account on the Fuji Testnet, and funding it with some test tokens.

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Avalanche tech with us you can join [**our community**](https://discord.gg/fszyM7K) today!

