---
description: >-
  We will learn how to create a generic Substrate compatible account and how to
  interact with the testnet faucet to get WND tokens for testing purposes.
---

# 2. Create a Polkadot account

We will be building on top of the Node.js application created in the previous tutorial, so make sure to have completed the previous tutorial:

1. \*\*\*\*[**Connecting to a Polkadot node with DataHub**](1.-connecting-to-a-polkadot-node-with-datahub.md)\*\*\*\*

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/Rk2JeI1azBw" caption="Creating a Polkadot Account on DataHub" %}

There are currently a few different ways to create a new account on Polkadot or a testnet like Westend:

* **Programmatically** \(with code\) with the Polkadot API _\(this tutorial\)_
* **Through a web browser** by using the [Polkadot Apps Wallet](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/accounts) \(_in some kind of hurry for a hackathon?\)_
* **Through a terminal** by using [SubKey](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/learn-account-generation#subkey) \(_advanced, will not be covered in this tutorial_\)

We will be creating an account programmatically using the API, however you might find it useful to explore the other options depending on your needs.

## Get Started

Create a new file `create_account.js` in our project directory. The top portion here appears more lengthy, but it hasn't really changed much from the previous tutorial. What's new are the helper functions from the`@polkadot/util` and `@polkadot/util-crypto` portions of the API that will assist us in creating an account :

* `@polkadot/util-crypto` has functions to help us generate and validate a mnemonic seed phrase.
* `@polkadot/util` has functions that can help us prepare data for signing with our generated key pair.
* `Keyring` will help us manage sets of keys in a consistent environment and perform operations on these keys \(such as signing & verification\).
* `fs` will help us interact with our machine's **f**ile**s**ystem.

Copy and paste the following boilerplate into `create_account.js` and we will go through it line by line below, adding in the code to make it functional.

```javascript
const { ApiPromise, Keyring } = require('@polkadot/api');
const { HttpProvider } = require('@polkadot/rpc-provider');
const {
  mnemonicGenerate,
  mnemonicValidate,
} = require('@polkadot/util-crypto');
const {
  stringToU8a,
  u8aToString,
  u8aToHex 
} = require('@polkadot/util');
const fs = require('fs');
require("dotenv").config();

const main = async () => {
  const httpProvider = new HttpProvider(process.env.DATAHUB_URL);
  const api = await ApiPromise.create({ provider: httpProvider });
  const keyring = new Keyring({type: 'sr25519'});;
  
  // 1. Generate a mnemonic  
  // 2. Create an account  
  // 3. Persist the account data  
  // 4. Sign and verify a message
}

main().catch((err) => {
  console.error(err)
}).finally(() => process.exit());
```

## Generate a mnemonic phrase

We will generate a random mnemonic phrase using `mnemonicGenerate()`. As a security precaution, validate the generated seed phrase using `mnemonicValidate()`. Paste the following code below the comment `1. Generate a mnemonic` :

```javascript
// Create mnemonic string for your own account using BIP39
const MNEMONIC = mnemonicGenerate()
console.log(`mnemonicGenerate: ${MNEMONIC}`)
    
// Validate the mnemonic string that was generated, returns a boolean
const isValidMnemonic = mnemonicValidate(MNEMONIC)
console.log(`isValidMnemonic: ${isValidMnemonic}`)
```

{% hint style="info" %}
 **mnemonic** \nih-MAH-nik\ adjective. 1 : _assisting or intended to assist memory_; also : _of or relating to a technique of improving the memory_. 2 : _of or relating to memory_.

When you see this word in the code, it may be capitalized differently depending on the situation in which it is used. In all cases, it refers to the underlying concept of a memory aid, which is a series of words. `mnemonicGenerate()` can be given a word count of 12, 15, 18, 21, or 24. Without a parameter, it will default to 12 words. Those words are used to generate and derive keys. Read more about BIP39 [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki).
{% endhint %}

## Create an account

We can do this by supplying the generated seed phrase via `keyring.addFromUri()` .  
Paste this snippet beneath the comment `// 2. Create an account` :

```javascript
// Add account with keypair from the generated mnemonic
const newAccount = await keyring.addFromUri(`${MNEMONIC}`, { name: 'new keypair'})

// Show the pair has been added to our keyring
console.log(keyring.pairs.length, ' available keypair(s)')

// Display the metadata name & Substrate generic ss58Format encoded address
console.log(newAccount.meta.name, 'has address', newAccount.address)
```

The `addFromUri` method extracts the phrase, path and password from a SURI \([Substrate URI](https://polkadot.js.org/docs/keyring/start/suri/)\) format for specifying secret keys : `<secret>/<soft-key>//<hard-key>///<password>`   
The `///password` may be omitted, while `/<soft-key>` and `//<hard-key>` maybe repeated and mixed. The secret can be a hex string, mnemonic phrase or a string \(to be padded\).  
It is important to note that we do not cover providing a pair password to secure encoded account data in this tutorial. Any accounts generated with this code should be treated as entirely insecure and are not intended for use in production environments**.**

Here are examples of constructing a SURI. Don't bother copying these lines into the source file, they are only for an examination of the syntax for [derivation paths](https://support.mycrypto.com/general-knowledge/ethereum-blockchain/what-is-a-derivation-path).

```javascript
keyring.addFromUri(`${MNEMONIC}`, { name: 'a simple keypair', derivation: 'root'})
keyring.addFromUri(`${MNEMONIC}/figment`, { name: 'a keypair derived with a soft-key', derivation: '/figment'})
keyring.addFromUri(`${MNEMONIC}/figment//community`, { name: 'a keypair derived with a soft-key & hard-key', derivation: '/figment//community'})
keyring.addFromUri(`${MNEMONIC}/figment//community///rocks`, { name: 'a keypair derived with a soft-key, hard-key & password', derivation: '/figment//community///rocks'})
```

In the case of the Substrate URI we are supplying to `addFromUri()`, the `///<password>`path is not to be confused with a pair password as implemented on the keyring. Using these means that an initial key derivation function is applied, so that even if the seed would leak, other accounts cannot be derived from that seed without the initial password. Unlike hard and soft derivations that can be mixed, only a single password should be specified per derivation.

{% hint style="warning" %}
What are 'external' accounts, i.e. when to set the `isExternal` meta key to true?

* An external account is one where the keys are not managed by keyring, e.g. in Parity Signer or with a Ledger Nano.
{% endhint %}

## **Persist the account data**

Place the following code below the comment line `// 3. Persist the account data` :

```javascript
// Convert the account data to JSON and format it for readability   
const accountData = JSON.stringify(keyring.toJson(newAccount.address), null, 2);

// Generate a filename from the account address
const fileName = newAccount.address.substr(0, 8).toUpperCase();

// Write the data to disk
fs.writeFileSync(`${fileName}.json`, accountData);
console.log(`Wrote accountData to ./${fileName}.json`);
```

The account data can now be persisted - another way of saying 'written to disk in JSON format' - in a file which will be named with the first 8 characters of the address.  We use the `writeFileSync()` function from `fs` , which is one of the core modules of Node.js. Using `JSON.stringify()` to format our file for readability is not strictly necessary, however it is more difficult to read unless we perform this step.

This code does not need to check for the existence of any account data files before writing, because it uses part of the unique address as a filename - therefore running `create_account.js` multiple times will never overwrite any existing JSON files. We will need to make a note of the mnemonic seed phrase of any accounts we intend to use, because that information is not written to the JSON file. In any case, this tool is for learning and illustration only and should not be used to manage keys for any actual project.

{% hint style="warning" %}
### Various Address Formats

The address format used in Substrate-based chains is SS58, which is a modification  
of Base-58-check from Bitcoin. Notably, the format contains an _address type_ prefix that identifies an address as belonging to a specific network.

For example:

* Generic Substrate addresses start with 5.
* Polkadot addresses always start with the number 1.
* Kusama or Testnet addresses always start with a capital letter like C, D, F, G, H, J...

You can learn more about the prefixes[ here](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/wiki/External-Address-Format-%28SS58%29).
{% endhint %}

## Signatures and Verification

Finally, we will perform a verification check by signing a message with our newly created keypair. This allows us to be sure that our generated keypair will function for the purposes of signing messages which is a fundamental topic when using any cryptographically secure blockchain.   
  
We need to first convert our message from a text string into an unsigned 8-bit array to perform the signing. The rationale for this being that we can `.sign()` the message with a method from KeyringPair, which is part of the Keyring API we required at the beginning of our program.  
With this newly signed message we can attempt to `.verify()` it, passing in the _original_ message, the _signed_ message, and supplying the _publicKey of the signing account_. In this way, we can verify messages without ever exposing the privateKey. 

The helper functions `u8aToHex` and `u8aToString` are used here to format the data for readability.

Write the following code underneath the comment line `// 4. Sign and verify a message`:

```javascript
// Convert message to an Unsigned 8-byte Array
const message = stringToU8a('this is my message in a bottle')

// Sign the message with both accounts
const signature = newAccount.sign(message)

// Verify the message was signed
const isValid = newAccount.verify(message, signature, newAccount.publicKey)

console.log(`The signature ${u8aToHex(signature)}, is ${isValid ? '' : 'in'}valid for message "${u8aToString(message)}"`)
```

We can harness the power of string interpolation and the ternary operator here to easily construct some informative, dynamic output.

```javascript
// string interpolation, template literal & ternary operator syntax
console.log(`${isValid ? '' : 'in'}valid`);
```

This string interpolation expression uses the `?` [ternary operator](https://www.javascripttutorial.net/javascript-ternary-operator/) to evaluate to 'in', when the value of `isValid` is false. If `isValid` is true, nothing will be displayed. The two single quotes with no space character between them are enclosing a nonexistent string - hence, no output. The `:` colon character is indicating the branch. The code on the left side of the colon will be used when `isValid` evaluates to true, while the code on the right side of the colon will be used when `isValid` evaluates to false.

Template literals are used extensively in many different kinds of software development. In a framework such as React, there can be different rules for template literals but in JavaScript the syntax should always be `${<expression>}`, where the expression can be a variable, a function, or even complex combinations of both! The point to remember is that whenever we encounter string interpolation in JavaScript, it will always be inside of backticks `````, and template literals are defined by a dollar sign and curled brackets: .  

Building a sentence to be logged as output to the console in this way is a common technique for developers to keep track of the data flow inside of their programs. Logging information to the console is not necessarily going to help us display anything to a user on a website, however it is fundamental to understand how to refer to the data we need, in code. A good bonus activity would be to play around with logging different information and constructing new strings, composed of various pieces of data.

## Run the **code!**

Now it is time to see our completed code in action and create our first Polkadot account :

```javascript
$ node create_account.js
```

We should see a similar output, although all of the specifics like the mnemonic, address and signature hash will be different each time. This example is included for _**demonstration purposes only**_ :

```bash
mnemonicGenerate: state mandate silly mail achieve arrest demise luggage device today crime aspect
isValidMnemonic: true
1 available keypair(s)
new keypair has address 5CuBFHntZT5hYVdEsy4EV4uDG2N5ATeophus6h9L7F3yDFvE and derivation path undefined

The signature 0x1c29868c728fdbe882c5fe1d
1e7617f4142c91ff9533107b2362d81ae3ab751c
9714dee8cb9cc2b91c0d5b3744bdb0685a3f9a5e
c1a499431939b4c0e0dcab8f, is valid for message "this is my message in a bottle"
```

Our account has been created, persisted and is ready for action! Now that we have the ability to sign messages on Polkadot, we can perform other actions. Here's what the `.json` file made with the above mnemonic would look like:

```javascript
{
  "encoded": "MFMCAQEwBQYDK2VwBCIEIIA3kOBxfz+xmi5wt1PARcFJiP4asx166LlGD8nIXP5WfhbdNutIu2lOz+fpBnbfUp633L86FkU8YG1ch7T5JrahIwMhACT3+4J2QBedil0RjbtXZwvHOQ66KnCp3kmFFHG6ZjpL",
  "encoding": {
    "content": [
      "pkcs8",
      "sr25519"
    ],
    "type": [
      "none"
    ],
    "version": "3"
  },
  "address": "5CuBFHntZT5hYVdEsy4EV4uDG2N5ATeophus6h9L7F3yDFvE",
  "meta": {
    "name": "new keypair",
    "derivation": "root"
  }
}
```

We must now add the mnemonic and the address of one of our generated accounts to the `.env` file in preparation for the next step where we will be querying account information. For demonstration purposes, the address from the new keypair we generated would look like the examples above \(however we will want to insert the address we just generated instead of this example one - for the reason that the example seed phrase above is public and therefore **not secure**\):

```bash
MNEMONIC='paste mnemonic here'
ADDRESS=paste address here, without quotes
```

So a completed and accurate .env file will look like this _example_ :

```bash
MNEMONIC='state mandate silly mail achieve arrest demise luggage device today crime aspect'
ADDRESS=5CuBFHntZT5hYVdEsy4EV4uDG2N5ATeophus6h9L7F3yDFvE
```

## Next steps

We now have an account to interact with Polkadot \(on the Westend testnet\). Our account data is persisted in a `.json` file which is named using the first eight characters of the address in uppercase format. We have also learned how to verify the integrity of a signed message using helper utils from the Polkadot API. In the next tutorial, we will be looking at different queries we can run against a Polkadot node to gather useful information.

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Polkadot with us you can join our [Community Forums](https://community.figment.io) or our [Discord community](https://discord.com/invite/fszyM7K) today for up-to-date news and events!

