---
description: Learn how to create an account to start building on Celo
---

# 2. Create your first Celo account

## Introduction

In this tutorial, we will be creating your Celo account using ContractKit and DataHub.

### Prerequisites

Please make sure that you completed the tutorial:

1. [Connecting to Celo node with DataHub](https://learn.figment.io/network-documentation/celo/tutorial/1.connect)

We will be building on top of the NodeJS application you created in the previous tutorial.

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/3VJyk669O-k?list=PLkgTdjgP1aUCmcXrTxyRReS5OSLXlqGzB" caption="Celo Learn Pathway Tutorial \#2: Create your First Celo Account" %}

## Creating Account

It’s time to create your first Celo account on the Alfajores testnet. Without it, you won’t be able to fully take advantage of Celo's features.

Create a file `create_account.js` which the snippet below:

```javascript
const ContractKit = require('@celo/contractkit');
const Web3 = require('web3');

require('dotenv').config();

const main = async () => {
  const web3 = new Web3(process.env.REST_URL);
  const client = ContractKit.newKitFromWeb3(web3);

  const account =  web3.eth.accounts.create();

  console.log('address: ', account.address);
  console.log('privateKey: ', account.privateKey);
};

main().catch((err) => {
  console.error(err);
});
```

This code should look familiar to you because it is similar to the code from tutorial \#1. After we connect to the node we use the snippet below to create a new Celo account:

```javascript
const account =  web3.eth.accounts.create();
```

Once this file is in place, you can run the `create_account.js` script:

```bash
node create_account.js
```

That’s it! It's this simple to create your new Celo account. The above command's output will provide you with very important information: address and privateKey. `Address` is your Celo address which can be freely shared with other users. However, `privateKey` is only for your own use.

**Never share your private key with anybody**

In order to make sure our code doesn’t leak sensitive data, we can use our `.env` file where we can store our private key. Open up `.env` and add to it like in the snippet below:

```text
ADDRESS=<ADDRESS FROM CONSOLE LOG>
PRIVATE_KEY=<PRIVATE KEY FROM CONSOLE LOG>
```

Awesome! Now we will be able to use `PRIVATE_KEY` in our next tutorials.

## Getting testnet tokens

Congratulations! You have created your first Celo account but it is still not very useful without any funds in it. In order to receive some Alfajores testnet tokens we have to use this public [Faucet](https://celo.org/developers/faucet). Copy your address from the `.env` file and paste it to the text field on that page. Upon going through captcha validation and clicking on the `Get Started` button you should receive free testnet tokens.

Great! Your account now should have 5CELO and 10cUSD tokens.

What is the difference between these two tokens? `CELO` is a Celo network native asset which may be used to take actions on-chain, such as participating in governance. `cUSD` is the first stablecoin supported by Celo network. It uses CELO as its collateral and it makes sure that transactions can occur quickly, cheaply, and reliably on-chain.

## Conclusion

In this tutorial, we followed best practices to create your first Celo account and store sensitive information in an `.env` file.

The complete code for this tutorial can be found on [**Github**](https://github.com/figment-networks/tutorials/tree/main/celo/2_creating_account).

### Next steps

Now that we have a Celo account created and funded with testnet tokens, let’s move on to querying a Celo node to get the following information:

* blockchain details
* account details

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Celo and DataHub tech with us you can [join our community](https://discord.gg/Chhuv5zHy3) today!

