---
description: Learn how to create and interact with Celo smart contracts
---

# 5. Write and deploy your first Celo smart contract

## Introduction

In this tutorial, we will create, deploy and interact with our own Smart Contract on the Celo network. As we’ve mentioned in previous tutorials, Celo is a close cousin of Ethereum, which means we have Ethereum's rich developer ecosystem and tooling at our disposal. We will be deploying a simple hello world smart contract to the Alfajores testnet using Datahub, Truffle, and Ganache.

### Prerequisites

Since Celo runs the Ethereum Virtual Machine, we can use Truffle to compile our smart contract. First step is to make sure that you have truffle installed:

```bash
npm install -g truffle
```

Please make sure that you completed the tutorials:

1. [Connect to Celo node with DataHub](https://learn.figment.io/network-documentation/celo/tutorial/1.connect)
2. [Create your first Celo account](https://learn.figment.io/network-documentation/celo/tutorial/2.account)
3. [Query the Celo Network](https://learn.figment.io/network-documentation/celo/tutorial/3.query)
4. [Submit your first transactions](https://learn.figment.io/network-documentation/celo/tutorial/4.transactions)

We will be building on top of the NodeJS application you created in the previous tutorials.

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/pQvrl4yOi10?list=PLkgTdjgP1aUCmcXrTxyRReS5OSLXlqGzB" caption="CELO Learn Pathway Tutorial \#5: Write and deploy your first Celo smart contract" %}

## Creating project

Since this tutorial is a little bit more involved, we will be creating a new NodeJS project for it.

Truffle comes with bare project templates which are called boxes. They are used to speed up the development process. Since this is not a tutorial about writing Solidity smart contracts, we will use Metacoin box in this tutorial. This box contains a simple smart contract for sending and receiving tokens.

In the project root directory, run the following command:

```bash
truffle unbox metacoin
```

Once this command is done executing, you will have a project with the following items:

* **contracts/** - directory where you keep Solidity contracts
* **migrations/** - directory for scriptable deployment files
* **test/** - directory for test files
* **truffle-config.js** - configuration file

## Setup project

Now open truffle-config.js and replace the content of this file with the following snippet:

```javascript
const ContractKit = require('@celo/contractkit');
const Web3 = require('web3');

require('dotenv').config({path: '../.env'});

// Create connection to DataHub Celo Network node
const web3 = new Web3(process.env.REST_URL);
const client = ContractKit.newKitFromWeb3(web3);

// Initialize account from our private key
const account = web3.eth.accounts.privateKeyToAccount(process.env.PRIVATE_KEY);

// We need to add private key to ContractKit in order to sign transactions
client.addAccount(account.privateKey);

module.exports = {
  networks: {
    test: {
      host: "127.0.0.1",
      port: 7545,
      network_id: "*"
    },
    alfajores: {
      provider: client.connection.web3.currentProvider, // CeloProvider
      network_id: 44787  // latest Alfajores network id
    }
  }
};
```

This instructs Truffle to use two networks: test, and Alfajores.

{% hint style="info" %}
You can change the path of .env file if you have your .env file in the same directory instead of root directory like this `require ('dotenv').config({path: '.env'});`
{% endhint %}

## Compile the smart contract

Before we can deploy the contract to the Celo network, we need to first compile the Solidity code into Ethereum bytecode. In order to do that we need to run:

```text
truffle compile
```

After this command is done running, you should see a new `build` folder inside of your project, which contains a bunch of JSON files. Please do not edit those JSON files as they are required by Truffle to work correctly.

## Deploy the smart contract

There are 2 ways to deploy your smart contract. We could use Truffle to do so or we could submit an on-chain transaction that will deploy the smart contract. We will go with the former for the purpose of this tutorial. Use below Truffle command to deploy your smart contract:

```bash
truffle migrate --network alfajores
```

If everything goes right, this should deploy your MetaCoin smart contract to the Celo Alfajores testnet using DataHub. In the output of this command, you should find a transaction hash, which you can use to lookup transactions on [Alfajores Celo Explorer](https://alfajores-blockscout.celo-testnet.org/).

## Interacting with your smart contract

Now that our MetaCoin smart contract has been deployed it is time to interact with it.

Let’s create a new file `interactions.js` with the following content:

```javascript
const ContractKit = require('@celo/contractkit');
const Web3 = require('web3');
const MetaCoin = require('./build/contracts/MetaCoin.json');

require('dotenv').config();

const main = async () => {
  // Create connection to DataHub Celo Network node
  const web3 = new Web3(process.env.REST_URL);
  const client = ContractKit.newKitFromWeb3(web3);

  // Initialize account from our private key
  const account = web3.eth.accounts.privateKeyToAccount(process.env.PRIVATE_KEY);

  // We need to add private key to ContractKit in order to sign transactions
  client.addAccount(account.privateKey);

  // Check the Celo network ID
  const networkId = await web3.eth.net.getId();

  // Get the contract associated with the current network
  const deployedNetwork = MetaCoin.networks[networkId];

  if (!deployedNetwork) {
    throw new Error(`${networkId} is not valid`);
  }

  // Create a new contract instance with the MetaCoin contract info
  let instance = new web3.eth.Contract(
    MetaCoin.abi,
    deployedNetwork.address
  );

  // Get balance
  let balanceBefore = await instance.methods.getBalance(account.address).call();
  console.log('Balance before:', balanceBefore);

  // Send tokens
  const recipientAddress = '0xD86518b29BB52a5DAC5991eACf09481CE4B0710d';
  const amount = 100;

  const txObject = await instance.methods.sendCoin(recipientAddress, amount);
  let tx = await client.sendTransactionObject(txObject, { from: account.address });

  let receipt = await tx.waitReceipt();
  console.log('Sent coin smart contract call receipt: ', receipt);

  // Get balance again
  let balanceAfter = await instance.methods.getBalance(account.address).call();
  console.log('Balance after:', balanceAfter);
};

main().catch((err) => {
  console.error(err);
});
```

There is a lot going on here so let’s break it down a little bit.

After initializing ContractKit and adding our account to it, we have to create a new contract instance using smart contract ABI and the address of the network this smart contract has been deployed to. Once this is done, we can call the `getBalance` method of our smart contract. This call should output `Balance before: 10000` as this is the initial amount assigned to our address.

Next step is to send `100` tokens to a different address. Here we first create a transaction object and then send it to the Celo Alfajores node for processing. Once this transaction is completed we call `getBalance` to check if our balance has been updated. If all went well the output should read `Balance after: 9900`.

Ok, it's time to run the script:

```bash
node interactions.js
```

Congratulations! You’ve just interacted with your own instance of a smart contract deployed to the Celo Alfajores testnet.

## Conclusion

In this tutorial, we learned quite a lot! We took a quick look at one of Ethereum’s most powerful development tool - Truffle. We used it to compile our smart contract. Then we deployed our smart contract with few lines of Javascript code and called two methods on that smart contract.

The complete code for this tutorial can be found on [**Github**](https://github.com/figment-networks/tutorials/tree/main/celo/5_contracts).

We have only covered a very small area of contract development. We invite you to keep experimenting on your own, and we will be providing more advanced Celo tutorials shortly to help you get to the next level.

[Please fill out this short form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1MZLA73jCka2OOBfUuLCBzKYiQtSkWUFC1W3eQ7mj1s4/viewform?edit_requested=true) to help our friends at Celo get a better understanding of who our users are!

If you had any difficulties following this tutorial or simply want to discuss Celo and DataHub tech with us you can[ join our community](https://discord.gg/Chhuv5zHy3) today!

